---
title:
    How KoboToolbox and Purposeful’s radio drama show support girls’ resistance
    in Sierra Leone
date: 08-10-2021
author: staff at Purposeful and Kobo Inc.
summary:
    Purposeful, a feminist hub based in Sierra Leone, was able to stay connected
    with over 15,000 girls throughout the country during COVID-19 by loading the
    KoboCollect app onto 700 smartphones and distributing them to over 700
    mentors for their Girls' Circle program.
thumbnail: blog/purposeful_01.jpg
is_featured: true
---

Throughout Sierra Leone, girls face many barriers to accessing education and
opportunities. When COVID-19 hit, this meant thousands more girls were out of
school and facing isolation. Local feminist organizations, such as
[Purposeful](https://wearepurposeful.org/), a feminist hub for girls activism
rooted in Africa and working all around the world, knew from girls’ experiences
during the Ebola outbreak that they needed to create different ways of reaching
girls.

{% include image.liquid file="blog/purposeful_01.jpg" caption="© Purposeful" type="full" %}

At the beginning of the pandemic, staff at Purposeful were hard at work on their
Girls’ Circle program, an initiative that uses girl-only spaces, radio programs,
and girl-led advocacy campaigns to create transformational change. They were in
the process of creating a new girl-centred radio drama and talk show, Karo Kura
Konnection and Kompin, which would deliver critical information directly to
girls as well as challenge societal stereotypes and spark girls’ imagination and
empowerment.

So how would Purposeful continue to connect, communicate, and receive feedback
from girls? The reason their content is so powerful and ground-breaking is
precisely due to it being girl-led and girl-informed, but now with everyone
isolated, they had to think outside the box.

Enter KoboToolbox.

Staff were already using KoboToolbox to collect project data. Now, they went
about setting up
[KoboCollect](https://support.kobotoolbox.org/kobocollect-android.html), the
KoboToolbox Android app, on 700 smartphones that they bought for the Girls’
Circle mentors. They knew time was limited and were able to rapidly test their
survey forms on the KoboCollect app with a small group of mentors before
distributing the phones across the country. This was the first time using a
smartphone for many of the mentors and staff at Purposeful ensured everyone
received remote training on using smartphones and KoboCollect.

> "We were already using Kobo with partners to collect basic project data and it
> proved intuitive to use, had offline functionality, and came with no cost - so
> the decision to use Kobo with mentors was an easy one." -
> [Purposeful Org](https://we-are-purposeful.medium.com/the-importance-of-girls-voices-during-emergencies-here-s-how-we-listened-dc5babf5ac91)

The results?

At the height of the pandemic, Purposeful was receiving hundreds of survey
submissions from over 400 mentors on a weekly basis. Over 15,000 girls are a
part of the Girls’ Circle program and they were able to regularly and reliably
share their feedback on the program, its content, and what they want to see next
with their mentors through KoboToolbox. Mentors were also able to share girls’
stories outside of the program - stories of resisting early forced marriage,
gender-based violence and, in some cases, even female genital mutilation. Others
shared stories of hope, friendship, solidarity, and inspiration.

{% include image.liquid file="blog/purposeful_02.jpg" caption="© Purposeful" type="left" %}

While this remarkable effort was not without setbacks and challenges -
distributing hundreds of phones across the country taught staff at Purposeful
the value of setting realistic expectations for the scale of data as well as the
importance of phone covers and screen protectors - the program was a success
overall and shows how critical data collection is during emergencies and
pandemics. More importantly, it proves that adaptation and ingenuity can lead to
even stronger data collection during times of crisis.

To this day, Purposeful continues to use KoboCollect to collect data and
feedback from mentors every week, ensuring that the program remains girl-led and
relevant. As they enter another wave of COVID-19, they now have the foundation
and experience to continue to reach girls during a time they need it most.

To learn more about Purposeful and their programs, visit their website at
[https://wearepurposeful.org/](https://wearepurposeful.org/).
