---
title: How the Caribbean Development Bank is using KoboToolbox to enhance community resilience in the Caribbean
date: 07-03-2022
author: Mae-Lin DeLange
summary:
    The Caribbean Development Bank, an institution dedicated to reducing
    inequality in its member countries, has provided critical training to over
    200 aid workers on using the KoboCollect app to gather data for emergency
    response and disaster risk management, which is used to empower communities
    to become partners in building their own resilience.
thumbnail: CDB_blog_01.jpg
---

Latin America and the Caribbean are two of the most disaster-prone regions in
the world. In the last two decades,
[over 152 million people](https://reliefweb.int/report/world/natural-disasters-latin-america-and-caribbean-2000-2019)
have been displaced and horribly affected by 1,205 disasters, with earthquakes
and hurricanes being the most common. As climate change causes increasingly
severe hurricane seasons and greater devastation, disaster management and
response preparedness are more essential than ever.

{% include image.liquid file="/images/blog/CDB_blog_01.jpg" caption="CDRRF Data Collection Volunteer administering the Livelihood Baseline Assessment Survey in Toledo District, Belize using KoboToolbox. © Caribbean Development Bank" type="full" %}

In these emergency situations where access to real-time data is critical,
KoboToolbox makes a difference. The
[Caribbean Development Bank (CDB)](https://www.caribank.org) is one of many
organizations using KoboToolbox to improve response capacity in disaster
scenarios.

Recently, we spoke with Richardo Aiken, Community Development Specialist at CDB,
about his work to enhance community resilience and how KoboToolbox is helping
establish better baseline data to improve disaster response.

Aiken’s efforts seek to strengthen disaster risk management and climate change
adaptation risk preparedness within vulnerable communities across the
[Borrowing Member Countries (BMCs)](https://www.caribank.org/countries-and-members/borrowing-members).
Given their membership with CDB, these BMCs can borrow funds from the bank to
finance social and economic programs.

Learn more about Richardo’s innovative work below _(Note: The following
conversation has been edited for length and clarity)_.

{% include image.liquid file="/images/blog/CDB_blog_02.jpg" caption="CDRRF Data Collection Volunteer administering Livelihood Baseline Assessment in Chateaubelair, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, using KoboToolbox. © Caribbean Development Bank" type="left" %}

**What is CDB doing to strengthen disaster risk management, risk preparedness,
and climate change adaptation capacity across communities? How does this relate
to data collection?**

**Richardo Aiken:** The CDB manages the
[Community Disaster Risk Reduction Fund (CDRRF)](https://www.caribank.org/our-work/programmes/community-disaster-risk-reduction-fund),
a multi-donor trust fund focused on community-based disaster risk reduction
across four countries: Jamaica, Belize, British Virgin Islands, and Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines.

With contributions from the Government of Canada, the European Union and the
CDB, this fund supports projects that reduce the impacts of natural hazards and
support climate change adaptation. By engaging in infrastructure improvements,
vulnerability assessments, and training initiatives, the fund supports local
farmers, fisherfolk, small business owners and employees, youth, and the elderly
in these communities.

Given this community-driven approach, data collection is seen as critical by the
CDB and our partners to gather timely information on different community issues
to inform our planning interventions. We are especially focused on how to
improve community participation in these initiatives.

**How would you describe CDB’s work in Latin America and the Caribbean?**

**RA:** At CDB, we are driving an innovation model that prioritizes efficiency
to improve our service offerings and optimizes the thought leadership that we
provide to our BMCs. Ultimately, this focus has driven our need for data.

Dr. Gene Leon, President of the CDB, continues to articulate the perspective
that in order to adequately understand and respond to the developmental
challenges of our Region, we need to target better in order to measure better.
Access to current and accurate data on our BMCs remains a critical step in
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.

When planning for any situation, not just for an emergency, we know that we need
access to reliable data. Whether initiating poverty reduction efforts, planning
environmental interventions, or preparing climate change adaptations - all of
these initiatives require data.

The global pandemic showed how critical it is to have accurate, reliable data
and a platform that enables organizations to better respond during, or post,
emergencies like this one.

**What did your initial data collection efforts and methods look like?**

**RA:** To improve our disaster risk management, we needed to capture
pre-disaster event data on the main livelihood activities in a community. To
gather this information, we collaborated with the
[FAO](https://www.fao.org/home/en) to develop
[Livelihood Baseline Assessments (LBAs)](https://www.caribank.org/publications-and-resources/resource-library/guides-and-toolkits/quick-tips-guide-preparation-livelihood-baseline-assessment-and-contingency-plan)
for 26 communities.

Initially, we used paper-based surveys to gather information about communities.
However, as we were developing the LBAs, we had to find a quicker way to collect
data.

When an emergency strikes, one of the main issues is that we wouldn’t know what
was lost, without having data from these baseline data assessments. This
presents a major challenge in determining the value of what previously existed,
making it difficult for humanitarian aid organizations and governments, as well
as development agencies like the CDB to estimate the appropriate relief support
needed.

In a post-disaster scenario, this information is critical since it acts as a
baseline to assess what was lost and what the community looked like before. This
comparison enables the CDB to develop a more reliable estimate of the support
needed and the value of what was destroyed. The tool also helps to inform the
Damage and Loss Assessment Reports and Post Disaster Needs Assessment, which are
critical for post-disaster planning and resource mobilization and allocation.

As we worked to collect LBA data, we had merely a few days in each country to
spend on data collection. Back then, our paper-based approach was taking up to
two weeks to fully collect and analyze all our findings. We also wanted to be
able to easily share our findings with the communities themselves. This led us
to discovering KoboToolbox.

**How did you first get involved with KoboToolbox?**

**RA:** We were first introduced to KoboToolbox through Dr. Donovan Campbell,
the Head of the Department of Geography and Geology at the University of the
West Indies, Mona.

At this point in time, we were looking for a quicker, more efficient mode of
data collection and analysis. Once we learned more about the platform’s
capabilities and novelty features, such as GPS mapping and pictures, and
realized how this addressed our needs, we started using KoboToolbox as our
primary data collection tool. Beyond this, we also use it in our work to provide
community-based data and to inform our planning.

**Can you tell us more about your experiences using KoboToolbox?**

**RA:** Our adoption of the KoboToolbox platform in our data collection and data
management is aligned with our innovation and knowledge management policy
framework. We believe it can lead to even greater opportunities for us in terms
of how we do business, as well as provide insight to other innovative platforms
that can be used.

We are also happy to report that we have received a great deal of positive
feedback from our data collectors who report they enjoy using this tool.

As the majority of CDRRF sub-projects are conducted in rural communities, we
especially value KoboToolbox’s online portal and offline capabilities. For
example, when using this tool in the remote areas of Belize, it has been
extremely useful to be able to collect information via cell phones and tablets
and then upload the data once we regain access to wifi.

The speed and ease of data collection and analysis has been significantly
enhanced, especially when compared to our previous methods.

**Since starting to use KoboToolbox, CDB has hosted several training sessions.
How did these sessions get started?**

**RA:** Once we decided to use KoboToolbox, we knew we wanted to ensure that all
the relevant persons had the skills to use the platform. We had our first
training session with over 50 of our stakeholders in December 2019 and then our
second one in 2020. Our third and
[most recent training session](http://www.thebahamasweekly.com/publish/caribbean-news/CDEMA_and_CDB_partner_to_enhance_Emergency_Data_Collection_Capacity_in_the_Caribbean68276.shtml)
was hosted on June 9, 2021, in collaboration with Caribbean Disaster Emergency
Management Agency (CDEMA) and was attended by over 200 humanitarian aid workers
and frontline disaster responders.  

{% include image.liquid file="/images/blog/CDB_blog_03.jpg" caption="Richardo Aiken, chairing the Virtual Kobotoolbox Training Webinar, hosted by CDB and CDEMA. © Caribbean Development Bank" type="left" %}

**Given the increasingly active hurricane seasons and worsening natural
disasters, was this a factor when organizing the latest training session?**

**RA:** In CDB’s discussions with CDEMA, we knew it would be critical to time
the workshop so that it fell prior to hurricane season.

In the event that the region experienced another emergency, we wanted to make
sure that more persons performing the post-disaster assessment were trained in
and aware of the KoboToolbox platform.

When this is not the case, disaster management and response can be significantly
hindered, such as in St. Vincent’s post-eruption scenario earlier this year
[2021]. There were only a limited number of persons with the skills to use
KoboToolbox, resulting in a restricted capacity to perform the necessary damage
assessments.

Enhancing this capacity is an important skill set to develop within our
respective countries to enable quicker assessment and response to these types of
emergencies.

**What has been the impact of all this data collection work so far?**

**RA:** Under the
[CDRRF](https://www.caribank.org/our-work/programmes/community-disaster-risk-reduction-fund),
we developed community profiles and Livelihood Baseline Assessments (LBAs) for
the first time. These efforts cover the eleven beneficiary communities in St.
Vincent and four of the five communities in Jamaica.

Today, these documents are readily available to inform planning at the local
level. Since the completion of this documentation, numerous partners from across
the region and beyond have reached out to us, requesting access to this
information to help inform their work in these spaces.

We plan to take on similar interventions in Belize and are in the process of
capturing data across the eleven communities in the Toledo area. Ultimately, we
hope to replicate this data-driven model across the other BMCs.

**What is a lesson you’ve learned from collecting community-based data?**

**RA:** From gathering information at the community level, we have noticed that
the absence of community-based data can provide serious challenges for
communities themselves.

For instance, they may have difficulty clearly articulating their needs in a
manner that is representative of the community. Let’s say there is an issue with
a community’s water supply. Without data on the number of persons impacted –
males and females - or the health risks resulting from limited access to potable
water, it can be challenging for local community groups to effectively advocate
for change.

Lacking these critical data points presents a huge issue when preparing funding
proposals for preventative relief efforts, as it is essential to clearly state
the issue and provide data on how this is impacting the community.

**Beyond collecting data in disaster scenarios, can you expand on how CDB is
using KoboToolbox?**

**RA:** As a bank, we are focused on making our region more resilient. Having
readily available information allows us to respond faster, while innovative data
collection platforms can help us to understand our risks and respond to these
within the shortest possible time because of how quickly data collection and
analysis can take place.

The baseline data collected by LBAs are not only valuable in post-disaster
settings, but also in pre-disaster scenarios since the information can highlight
existing vulnerabilities. For instance, it may show that a community is at risk
of land slippages. With the mapping feature and GPS capabilities of the
KoboToolbox platform, the most likely flood zones can be identified. Armed with
this knowledge, the community can address these risks before floods occur.

Using this readily available data, communities can now identify areas that are
most at risk, submit proposals for aid, and make more informed decisions to
better their quality of life. With access to data and information, communities
are empowered to become better partners in building resilience, rather than
relying solely on governments or international partners to recognize their
needs.

With this data-driven approach, communities can advocate for themselves,
articulate challenges faced, and seek funding for interventions.

**Looking ahead, how do you see enhanced data collection impacting the region?**

**RA:** Our organization hopes to build a culture of data, not just at the CDB
level, but within the region’s countries, ministries, departments, agencies, and
all the way to the communities at the grassroot level. Currently, we are
examining how online data collection can improve other projects and programs
across the organization, as is CDEMA.

Reliable data is not only critical in a post-disaster scenario, it provides us
the tools to consider how we can be more proactive in our response. If there is
an emergency or natural disaster, we can estimate what was lost and understand
how to build back better using the data and information provided by the
KoboToolbox platform.

Besides the applications in pre and post-disaster scenarios, KoboToolbox
provides access to readily available data and information, further broadening
the possible use cases. For instance, CDB conducts Country Poverty Assessments,
which evaluate program effectiveness and guide intervention development.

Together, CDB and CDEMA seek opportunities to provide ongoing support to further
resilience building within communities.

To learn more about the Caribbean Development Bank and their programs, visit
their website at [https://www.caribank.org/](https://www.caribank.org/).
